RFC: Changefile and changelog guidelines in PRs (#20881)
microsoft/fluentui: rfcs/convergence/changelog-guidelines.md

# Changelog (beachball changefile) guidelines

## Summary

This RFC proposes a set of guidelines when creating changefiles during a PR. These changefiles are directly translated
(in most cases) to our changelog which is important for users to see what changed between releases of Fluent. Therefore
this RFC proposes the following requirements for the changelog:

- Changes that do not affect published code should not be in the changelog
- Clear labels for change types
- The detail of changes should be descriptive first and short second
- Messages should be written for changes specific to the package, not the PR

The changefiles also directly influence how packages are bumped and released in the release pipeline.

## Problem statement

The current v9 changelog contains (or contained before removal) the following bad patterns that should not be in the changelog:

### Changelog entries that do not affect published code

> Changes such as:
> 
> - stories are updated
> - dev dependencies are updated
> - tests were added/updated
> - scripts were modified
> 
> Should not be included in the changelog. Generally when these kinds of changes are in the changelog they should be
> removed as soon as they are noticed.

Reviewer: nit, splitting "changes such as"/"should not..." is bugging me--but up to you whether to change it or not
```suggestion
Certain types of changes don't affect published code and should not be in the changelog. For example:

- stories are updated
- dev dependencies are updated
- tests were added/updated
- scripts were modified

Generally when these kinds of changes are in the changelog they should be
removed as soon as they are noticed.
```

It's also important that these kinds of change entries **should not bump upstream packages**. By bumping upstream
packages, we create new releases along the whole chain of dependencies where in fact nothing has actually changed
for partners. Even in the context of lockstep versioning these kinds of changes should not result in version bumps.

### Changelog entries that are focused on the PR

Quite often, a PR will address/fix an issue that spans several packages. While it's good practice to keep PRs as
small as possible, it is still possible that multiple packages need to be modified. This can also be acceptable when
an internal API is modified in a non-breaking way, but several consumers need to be updated at the same time.

> It is very easy to write a single changefile message during PR creating and apply it to all the changed packages in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is very easy to write a single changefile message during PR creation and apply it to all the changed packages in
```

> the PR. This makes the change harder to understand since the contents might only apply vaguely, or not at all to the package.

Reviewer: maybe?
```suggestion
the PR. This makes the changelog harder to understand since the message might not apply to a particular package.
```

> A simple example would be `Fix dependencies`, this kind of generic description can be applied to a PR when linked to

Author: This part concerns purely the changefile/changelog message, so I don't quite understand your point 😅

> A simple example would be `Fix dependencies`, this kind of generic description can be applied to a PR when linked to

Reviewer 2: tbh I don't understand my point either after so long time :D sorry about that

> an issue, but has an incredibly vague meaning with applied to the changelog of a package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an issue, but has an incredibly vague meaning when applied to the changelog of a package.
```

## Detailed design or proposal

### Semantic labels for changefile entries

Each changefile entry should have a message that has a semantic label that is inspired by [conventional commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/).
This RFC proposes four labels in the following form:

```
feat:  This label communicates that a feature was added to the package
fix:   This label communicates that a fix was applied to the package
chore: This label communicates that changes which should not have an affect on the user were applied
docs:  This label communicates that documentation was changed
```

> We can configure [danger.js](https://danger.systems/js/) to validate changefile entries in the PR that a correct

Author: sure I can remove it

is used for `type`.

The value of `dependentChangeType` is the same as `type`. However, this bump affects upstream packages that depend on the
package that the changefile references. Each upstream package will also have an added changelog entry which resembles

> Bump @fluentui/react-aria to v9.0.0-beta.4 ([PR #20762](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/20762) by beachball)

These kinds of 'bump' changelog entries are omitted from `react-components` when rolled up into the final changelog.

It could be possible to automatically enforce incorrect values for `type` and `dependentType` to some extent by
watching for changes in `api.md` file, automation cannot cover all cases such as:

- Changing internal logic that does not affect API
- Updating scripts instead of published code
- Updating stories and story utility code
- Updating tests and test utility code

In this case we should also be aware that in PRs, the values of these properties in the changefile matter and directly
influences what happens during release.

## Pros and Cons

### Pros

- Changelogs are an extra resource for partners during upgrades
- Easy to see what changed between versions during uprgades

> - Keep implementation details out of public changelog

Author: so bumps without public API changes should be possible ?

- Messages should be written for changes specific to the package, not the PR

The changefiles also directly influence how packages are bumped and released in the release pipeline.

## Problem statement

The current v9 changelog contains (or contained before removal) the following bad patterns that should not be in the changelog:

### Changelog entries that do not affect published code

Changes such as:

- stories are updated
- dev dependencies are updated
- tests were added/updated
- scripts were modified

Should not be included in the changelog. Generally when these kinds of changes are in the changelog they should be
removed as soon as they are noticed.

It's also important that these kinds of change entries **should not bump upstream packages**. By bumping upstream
packages, we create new releases along the whole chain of dependencies where in fact nothing has actually changed
for partners. Even in the context of lockstep versioning these kinds of changes should not result in version bumps.

### Changelog entries that are focused on the PR

Quite often, a PR will address/fix an issue that spans several packages. While it's good practice to keep PRs as

> small as possible, it is still possible that mutliple changes in different packages that need to be modified. This
> can also be acceptable when an internal API is modified in a non breaking way, but several consumers need to be updated
> at the same time.

Reviewer: nit, originally was going to fix the spelling of "multiple" but realized this whole line could be simplified
```suggestion
small as possible, it is still possible that multiple packages need to be modified. This can also be acceptable when
an internal API is modified in a non-breaking way, but several consumers need to be updated at the same time.
```

It is very easy to write a single changefile message during PR creating and apply it to all the changed packages in
the PR. This makes the change harder to understand since the contents might only apply vaguely, or not at all to the package.

A simple example would be `Fix dependencies`, this kind of generic description can be applied to a PR when linked to
an issue, but has an incredibly vague meaning with applied to the changelog of a package.

## Detailed design or proposal

### Semantic labels for changefile entries

Each changefile entry should have a message that has a semantic label that is inspired by [conventional commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/).
This RFC proposes four labels in the following form:

```

> feat:  This label communicates that a feature was added to the package

Reviewer 3: How do these semantic labels relate to the `type`s in the changefile?

It sounds like the sematic label is for human readers while the type in the changefile is used to drive semver? If this is the case it would be possible to have a message like "fix: fixed a button bug" with a type of `major`?

I ask because you mention taking the semantic names from convetional commits and my experience using conventional commits was with a tool called [commitizen](https://commitizen-tools.github.io/commitizen/) that uses the semantic label in the commit message to drive semver (i.e., `type`).

Have you considered strictly enforcing the semantic label and using it to drive the value of `type` in the changefile?

Reviewer: > How do these semantic labels relate to the types in the changefile?

There's almost always a strict correspondence:
```
feat     minor
fix      patch
chore    none
docs     probably none (a bit up to interpretation if it's API docs)
```

> Have you considered strictly enforcing the semantic label and using it to drive the value of type in the changefile?

This is what tools using [conventional changelogs](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/conventional-changelog) do.

We could also consider the inverse (if we're continuing to use beachball with the manual change type prompt): generate the semantic label based on the change type, instead of including it manually.

Author: > Have you considered strictly enforcing the semantic label and using it to drive the value of type in the changefile?

It's possible, but likely would involve major changes (perhaps breaking) to our release tool.... and honestly to do that work scares me (you can take a look at the codebase microsoft/beachball)

> generate the semantic label based on the change type

This is actually possible with custom changelog rendering in beachball, the main issue is that as you said. 

Then again the main reason we'd have these conventional commit like labels, is to have some way of categorizing changes in the changelog instead of being a dump of messages

Reviewer 2: > I ask because you mention taking the semantic names from convetional commits and my experience using conventional commits was with a tool called commitizen that uses the semantic label in the commit message to drive semver (i.e., type).

@spmonahan 

Commitizen indeed is amazing and I used it for most of my carer as well. 

The approach that falls short is within a monorepo setup. folks from atlassian created some additional functionality which in the end wasn't solving properly what was needed. Based on multiple lessons learned [changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) was created, which is a de facto "standard" for creating changelogs for OSS monorepos.

Reviewer: In the context of our current tooling, and given the 1-1 mapping between change type and semantic label, I still think this would be better handled with beachball custom renderers rather than requiring everyone to manually add appropriate prefixes (and adding danger checks or whatever to enforce it).

The requirement of manually adding prefixes could also create confusion for v8, since in [its changelog](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/master/packages/react/CHANGELOG.md) the messages are grouped under major/minor/patch headings and therefore probably shouldn't have additional semantic labels.

Reviewer 2: > beachball custom renderers 

can you provide more context pls?

> The requirement of manually adding prefixes could also create confusion for v8

this RFC is for vNext only correct  @ling1726 ? Question is if we are able to configure beachball for 2 separate workflows

Reviewer: For beachball custom renderers, I was originally thinking we could add code to prepend a label in this method:
https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/580595cf1c42675f9aa6e2f95756d073a2a98a85/scripts/beachball/customRenderers.ts#L34-L41

The problem is the change type isn't actually passed here, so we'd have to either add that on the beachball side or add a custom `renderEntries` (which does get the change type already).

I also realized from looking at the beachball code that once we have multiple change types (not just prerelease), the changelog will go from having a single "Changes" heading to having the change types grouped under headings:
```
### Minor changes
- `pkg1`
  - some minor change

### Patch changes
- `pkg2`
  - some patch change
```

So I'm not sure what would be the preferred approach at that point. Or what the implications are for whether to add any prefix requirements during beta/RC.

> Question is if we are able to configure beachball for 2 separate workflows

The changelong entry has the package name, so it's possible to do something different based on that if needed. (Would want to add a step somewhere to cache the list of v9 packages.)

fix:   This label communicates that a fix was applied to the package

> chore: This label communicates that changes which should not have an affect on th user were applied

Reviewer: Spelling nit. Also I personally dislike the "chore" naming and this notation in general, but it appears I'm thoroughly outnumbered in the open source community.
```suggestion
chore: This label communicates that changes which should not have an affect on the user were applied
```

docs:  This label communicates that documentation was changed
```

We can configure [danger.js](https://danger.systems/js/) to validate changefile entries in the PR that a correct
label has been applied.

### Stricter reviews for changefile comments

> There is no easy way to automate the quality of a changelog entry, this has to be done by humans in the PR reivew.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There is no easy way to automate the quality of a changelog entry, this has to be done by humans in the PR review.
```

This proposal tries to spread awareness that changefile entries are directly a part of our changelog and they should
be reviewed strictly.

### Stricter review of `type` and `dependentChangeType`

Here is a sample beachball changefile:

```json
{
  "type": "patch",
  "comment": "This comment is the message used in the changelog entry",
  "packageName": "@fluentui/babel-make-styles",
  "email": "jane.doe@contoso.com",
  "dependentChangeType": "patch"
}
```

The value of `type` determines what kind of version bump will be applied to the package on release. It can take the
following values:

- none
- prerelease
- patch
- minor
- major

These values are identical to standard semver bumps, and will result in bumps of that type being applied to the package
on release. Beachball will always pick the highest bump type among all changefiles for a package when bumping. A value
of `none` will result in no bumps applied to the package. The `comment` will not be applied to the changelog when `none`
is used for `type`.

> The value of `dependentChangeType` is the same as `type`. However, this bump affects upstream packages that depend on the

Reviewer: nit, should probably be something like "The possible values of `dependentChangeType` are the same as for `type`" (right now it could be read as they should literally be the same in the change file, which is often not true)

package that the changefile references. Each upstream package will also have an added changelog entry which resembles

> Bump @fluentui/react-aria to v9.0.0-beta.4 ([PR #20762](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/20762) by beachball)

These kinds of 'bump' changelog entries are omitted from `react-components` when rolled up into the final changelog.

> It could be possible to automatically enforce incorrect values for `type` and `dependentType` to some extent by

Reviewer: The only times we'd need to modify `dependentChangeType` are:
- Modifications to an API which is re-exported by another package => could possibly detect from api.md changes
- Modification to devDependency (eslint-plugin, react-conformance) => we should update beachball to allow automatically setting `dependentChangeType: none` for such packages

Author: > we should update beachball to allow automatically setting dependentChangeType: none for such packages

Not necessarily right ? since if we update something like `babel-make-styles` it's a dev dependency change but could actually impact our shipped code (styles)

Reviewer: It would be opt-in per package, only used for things like `eslint-plugin` or `react-conformance` that definitely shouldn't cause dependent bumps.
